## Class Imbalance
- Unequal distribution of class in a dataset. (Imbalanced dataset).
- Degrase the performance of the classifier model.
- Most of the predictions will correspond to the majority class and treat the minority class features as noise in data and ignore them.
- Result in **high bias in the model**

## How to Deal with Imbalanced Data
- Resampling
    1. Undersampling: Tend to removed instances from data that may be carrying some important information.
    2. Oversampling

## SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique)
- An oversampling technique.
- Sysnthetic samples are generated for the minority class.
- Helps to overcome the overfitting problem posed by random sampling.
- Focuses on the feature space to generate new instances with the help of interpolation between positive instances that lie together.

Procedure: 
1. Total number of oversampling observations, n is set up. Generally, it's selected such that the binary class distribution is 1:1. (Could be tuned down based on need)
2. Iteration starts by selecting a positive class instance at random.
3. KNN (K-Nearest Neightbors) algorithm's (default is 5) instance is obtained.
4. n of these K instances is chosen to interpolate new synthetic instances. The diff in distance between the feature vector and its neighbour is calculated using any distance metric.
5. The distance diff is multiplied by any random values in (0,1] and is added to previous feature vector.


## Example Code of SMOTE
      from imblearn.over_sampling import SMOTE
      
      counter = Counter(y_train)
      print("Before", counter)
      
      # oversampling train dataset using SMOTE
      smt = SMOTE()
      X_train, y_train = smt.fit_resample(X_train, y_train)
      X_train_sm, y_train_sm = smt.fit_resample(X_train, y_train)
      
      counter = Counter(y_train_sm)
      print("After", counter)
      
 ## Drawbacks of SMOTE
 - Synthetic instances generated are in the same direction (i.e. diagonal instances are connected by an artificial line). May complicate the decision surface generated by few classifier algorithms
- Tend to create a large number of noisy data in the feature space.
